7.1_Array_Basics

7.1 Array Basics

Array: An indexed structure that holds multiple values of the same type
Index: An integer representing the location of a particular value in an array
Zero-based Indexing: Start indexes at 0 and end at length - 1. Java does this, not all languages do.
Auto-Initialization: Automatically initialize a variable to a value when constructed
Traversing an array: Going through an array index by index to do something with the values in the array (see 7.2)
Sequential access: Manipulating values one by one in order.
```java
for (int i = 0; i < array.length; i++) {
	System.out.print("array at " + i + " was " array[i]);
	array[i] = 2 * i;
	System.out.println(" and is now " + array[i]);
}
```
Random access: Accessing an array index directly given an index, not sequentially.

Creating arrays: `type[] name = new type[length];`
`double[] grades = new double[5]`. Array will be initialized to a default value in each cell, in this case 0.0
Initializing arrays at start: `type[] name = {element1, element2, element3, ...}`
Editing arrays: `name[index] = value`. `grades[0] = 4.0; grades[1] = 3.6`
Array length attribute: `name.length` like `grades.length` --> 5
Accessing an array: `name[index]`, treat as any other variable. `int temp = (int) grades[1]`
- Note: the last element is `name[name.length - 1]`, not `name[name.length]`! This is due to zero-based indexing.

Common errors: Off-by-One is a common error that can be caused by the fact that java's indexing starts at 0 and not one. Make sure you keep that fact in mind and add/subtract from i when using the value in loops to adjust for this.

Arrays and Methods: Arrays are objects, so when passing them as a parameter to a method, the method works on the array itself, not a copy of it!
For-each loop: Loop through all elements in an array using the `for (type name : array) { body }` format

Arrays Class:
| Method | Description |
| -- | -- |
|copyOf(array, newSize) | Make a copy of an array with the new size
| copyOfRange(array, startidx, endidx) | Make copy of array starting and ending at indexes. Inclusive to exclusive
| equals(array1, array2) | Check if the contents and length of 2 arrays are idential. Do not use == for object equality, which includes arrays! |
| fill(array, value) | fill array completely with value |
| sort(array) | rearrange array so they sort in increasing order |
| toString(array) | convert array to a printable string [e1, e2, e3] |